[variant-json] made mutable with vendoring/inlining (#43)
wheelnext/peps: peps/pep-0825.rst

changes, the version number must be incremented. Tools MUST assume that
all variant wheels using an unknown format version are unsupported.

> The version numbers starting with zero are reserved for drafts and SHOULD

Reviewer: That's not relevant to the change in question, and I don't think it's a good idea. It's going to raise some eyebrows. If you really insist on using it in production, let's just remove the "and …" entirely.

> The version numbers starting with zero are reserved for drafts and SHOULD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The version numbers starting with zero are reserved for drafts and MUST
```

uploaded variant wheels or allow the user to manually generate it
themselves and upload it to the index.

> The variant JSON SHOULD NOT be considered immutable and MAY BE updated in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file SHOULD NOT be considered immutable and MAY BE updated in
```

> a backward compatible way at any point (e.g. adding a new type of variant).

Reviewer: Again, that looks like a fly-by change not relevant to the change in question. I don't think that's correct use of "immutable".

Reviewer: Oh wait, I've read this wrong.

as wheels with different Platform compatibility tags: either all variant
(and non-variant) wheels can be listed, or a subset of them.

A new ``[packages.variants-json]`` subtable is added to the file. As the
``{name}-{version}-variants.json`` file CAN be mutable, linking to the file
is not sufficient, ``pylock.toml`` MUST inline the content of the
``{name}-{version}-variants.json`` directly into ``pylock.toml``. Effectively
locking the content of the ``{name}-{version}-variants.json`` file itself
instead of the URL of the file with its hash (which can change). Doing so
also guarantee the highest performance possible by avoiding network calls

> at install time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new ``[packages.variants-json]`` subtable is added to the file. It MUST
inline the content of the ``{name}-{version}-variants.json`` file, converting
the JSON structure into the respective TOML types. The ``$schema`` key MUST
be preserved to facilitate versioning. The tools MAY remove keys that are not
relevant to variant wheels present in ``pylock.toml``.
```

If variant wheels are listed, the tool SHOULD resolve variants to select
the best wheel file.

The proposed text for :doc:`packaging:specifications/pylock-toml`
follows:

``[packages.variant_json]``
---------------------------

- **Type**: table
- **Required?**: no
- **Functions**:

>   - Inline variant selection metadata for the package.

Reviewer: This doesn't render correctly. Perhaps:

```suggestion

  - Inline variant selection metadata for the package.
```

the JSON structure into the respective TOML types. The ``$schema`` key
MUST be preserved to facilitate versioning. The tools MAY remove keys
that are not relevant to variant wheels present in ``pylock.toml``.

If variant wheels are listed, the tool SHOULD resolve variants to select
the best wheel file.

Proposed specification update
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The proposed text for :doc:`packaging:specifications/pylock-toml`
follows:

``[packages.variant_json]``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Type**: table
- **Required?**: no
- **Functions**:

  - Inline variant selection metadata for the package.
  - The structure of this table MUST conform to the JSON Schema.
  - Tools that support variant-aware resolution MUST validate this table
    against the referenced schema.
  - Tools that do not support variant-aware resolution MAY ignore this table
    but SHOULD preserve it when rewriting the lock file.

Example
'''''''

.. code:: toml

    lock-version = "1.0"
    created-by = "uv"
    requires-python = ">=3.14"

    [[packages]]
    name = "numpy"
    version = "2.3.4"
    index = "https://pypi.anaconda.org/mgorny/simple"
    wheels = [

>         { url = "https://pypi.anaconda.org/mgorny/simple/numpy/2.3.4/numpy-2.3.4-cp314-cp314-linux_x86_64-openblas.whl", hashes = {} },

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this uses `pypi.anaconda.org` on purpose or not. It might raise some eyebrows, so a non-existing `pypi.org` link might possibly be better. I'm not certain though.

Reviewer: It's an exact lock file generated by uv for the test packages I've built (except for variant metadata format that changes here) :-).

it can either be prepared and uploaded by the user, or it can be
generated automatically by the index.

Since the clients may cache the file at any point, it is recommended not
to publish it until it contains the metadata for all variants. If the

> index is responsible for generating the file, it should use some

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't say it like that and phrase it differently, you should upload all wheels roughly at the same time anyway.
